Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, from time to time on this program, we have
talked about the Trade Expansion Act, which President Kennedy has recommended and about
which we are also interested.
This I think is the biggest matter that will come before this Congress by far.
Bill has passed the House of Representatives, giving the President extended authority and
connection with our Trade Agreement Program and it will soon be coming up in the Senate.
So I thought that we would use this program today to talk about it.
And to give us some facts and information about the program, we are very fortunate today
in having with us Mr. Howard C. Peterson, the Assistant to the President on Trade Policies.
There's certainly glad to have you with us, Mr. Peterson.
It's a real pleasure, Senator.
And I'm Mr. Peterson has been appearing before committees, giving information, telling what
our present situation is, what the new expansion will mean and why it's so necessary.
But Mr. Peterson, I believe that you are a very distinct, while you're a big banker,
big in several ways, I'm sure physically and otherwise from Philadelphia, aren't you?
I am.
I have good many friends in the banking fraternity, I'm going to say too.
Yes, I know you do.
I was flimming.
Oh, I know.
I was saying, I know the American bankers are so sweet.
We're all very proud of Sam Fleming from over at Nashville and he is the President of the
American Bank of our association.
Of course, I know a lot of bankers, but I'm not always very happy to see them.
Oh, no.
Peterson, no, no.
You know, sometimes they ask me to come down and pay notes and the links of that sort.
But friends, of course, in Tennessee, we have always been internationally minded.
We understand the importance of exporting goods to other nations.
And of course, we've had a great statesman of Tennessee who was Mr. Cordell Holt, founder
of the Trade Agreement Act.
The inception of really the whole liberal trade policy in the United States started
with Mr. Cordell Holt in 1934.
And Trade Expansion Act, which is now before the Senate, is a natural continuation of
these policies which were approved some 11 times by the Congress of the United States
in extending the act.
Well, Mr. Holt and his great statesman ship showed that how trade was necessary for employment,
for industrial expansion for the farmers of America.
And also a very important part, which I have been interested in as a person who attends
the NATO Parliamentary Meet Parliamentary meetings and other things is that Mr. Holt preached
and showed that if you trade with the people of the world, you have a better chance of
living in peace with them.
So that we are interested in Tennessee.
And I think at this time, we might also hear from the President of the United States and
his State of the Union message.
He very briefly put forth the challenge in connection with the Trade Agreement's Expansion
Act.
And so we'll hear from the President of the United States.
Now, Mr. Peterson, this new bill that we are considering gives the President an extended
power in connection with tariffs and trade agreements.
What is the necessity for it?
What has taken place in the world that makes this situation necessary?
There is a new trading world and the best demonstration of this is the great and phenomenal
growth of the common market in Europe.
This was only started in 1958, which was the last time that the Trade Agreement's program
came before the Congress.
In the common market, you know, you have the Battleix countries, Belgium and Holland and
Luxembourg and you have France and Germany and Italy.
And they are going to abolish the tariffs between Britain.
Britain has now asked to join and its succession to this market.
I think seems reasonably assured.
And they are really doing, they are creating a market just as we create a market in 1789 with
no tariffs between the states and with a common external tariff against the outsiders.
This is the most important market, which our exporters enjoy.
I mean, 19...
Yes, how much did we accept?
It was under like $6 billion last year.
And then we united Kingdom and the Western Europe.
And from this market, something only taking about four billions.
So we have a very favorable balance of trade.
Very balanced on the plus side of about two billion dollars.
Right.
And it's our most important market for farm produce.
I mean, they take a great deal of our wheat, our tobacco, our cotton, many, many of our
products of our farm.
But even in manufacturers, we have a balance, a favorable balance of trade with them.
Now, one thing we know is that they are going to abolish all the tariffs between the
member states and erect this common external tariff.
And then, unless we can kind of batter down this common external tariff so that the discrimination
against this is at least tolerable and we can still get in and sell our goods, we are
going to lose our position in this important market.
This is kind of the threat side, but there's also a challenge side.
Well, let's talk a little bit more about just what it means.
When the world, generally, last year, we exported something in the neighborhood of 20 billion
dollars and we imported about 15, so that we sold about five billion more than we took
in.
Now, what does this mean to the American people and to the manufacturers and to the farmers,
Mr. Peterson, the fact that we...
Well, it means jobs, it means profits.
When you analyze these figures, there isn't a really...
The story isn't told by the difference between the 20 billion and the 15 because of this
15 billion of imports.
About 60 percent are things we either don't produce at all or we produce it in sufficient
quantities.
We have 10 and a nickel and a whole range of industrial goods which create jobs because
without them our factors could run.
All the things like tropical agriculture products, which we like like bananas, and coffee
and cocoa and tea, so that you only really, in terms of job competing, have imports of
about $6 billion and you have to compare this with the 20 billion dollars.
There have been lots of the estimates made of what the jobs involved are.
I think the labor of the farm and the labor of the statistics says it was about 3 million
jobs in factories directly related to export.
Industrial plants and about a great many on the farms of the United States where we export
a great deal of our farm product.
Right, that's true.
Right.
Well, I think we've got a ton of people to see what I'd like to know just briefly, but
the present export program means to the people of Tennessee.
According to the record, almost 78 million jobs in Tennessee in 1900 and 78 thousand.
78 thousand, oh yeah.
I know that Tennessee is a lot of the important ones.
But I think they're quite that many.
Not quite that many.
But anyway, almost 77 thousand employees worked in factories that exported more than
$220 million.
And also that we are 16th in that year in manufacturing exports.
And we find that in agriculture in Tennessee in 1961 that we exported products amounting
to $93 million.
A million in livestock and animals, 600 thousand in fruit and nuts, 600 thousand in vegetables,
that we had 37,600 farm workers were employed in producing things that were exported.
You know, you have a substantial stake in Tennessee on this program.
We are of course worried about the fact that we've had a gold ray in against the United
States for off and on for some years.
Unless we can export and have a favorable trade balance, that gold ray will continue to
be larger.
We'll get larger and larger.
If we could actually increase our export surplus, this is one possible way of avoiding
any drain on our gold and well-alancing on our repayments.
Our export surplus has met a whole lot to employment and industries on the farm, starting
in a leap of this country in the past.
What is your prediction if we can negotiate somehow with this great common market that
has become a reality?
Do you think it will mean even more additional employment for the people in the United States?
Well, I believe so, Sun Gerrit.
I think it's very hard to prove anything about the future because it's the future is rather
inscrutable.
It much depends on the general level of the economic activity of the trading partners.
But we know that we're going to be worse in our position if we're not able to deal with
the common market.
And I think we have the opportunity of enhancing our export position in this market because
it has a big demand factor that is growing so rapidly and it is our most important.
Now, of course, our industries are going to be adversely affected.
We know that, of course, and some they perhaps can manufacture things in other countries
more reasonably than we can.
Are there provisions in the bill for taking care of these adversely affected?
I think the President's proposals in the Trade Expansion Act make better provision
for these possibilities and have ever been suggested to the Congress before because there's
a program of trade adjustment assistance whereby small firms, if they're hurt by import
competition, can obtain governmental assistance in the forms of loans and workers, if they're
unemployed or if they find they're under employed because of import competition, can obtain
allowances which will permit them to be retrained for jobs in which they can better compete.
But I don't think that really we're going to feel these hurts.
In the first place, this program will go into effect only very gradually.
The act of odds of any reductions in tariffs may not be put into effect in a period of less
than five years.
Now, this gives a lot of time for a just a normal adjustment.
And of course, the big thing that appeals to me and I think all Americans is that by having
a great trading area that we are gaining in strength as against the Soviet bloc.
And I think it might be well who hear the President again as to what this kind of leadership
means.
Well, I know that Mr. Krushchev doesn't want to see this common market become a reality
and he doesn't want to be the one to become a part of it because that's the reason.
That means that economically and industrially and in all kinds of strength we'll have a much
great advantage over the communist bloc and therefore a better chance for peace in the
world, doesn't it?
I strongly believe that, sir.
Well, thank you very much, Mr. Peterson, for being with us and that's all for this time,
friends.